So, what is R?
R is a general purpose open- source
programming language used  primarily
in statistical and data science  fields
Let's look a bit deeper to find  out what that means
There were three key terms:  general-purpose, open-source,  and data science
Let's take general-purpose first
General-purpose is when a  programming language
can be used in a wide variety of application domains
making R useful in many ways
This could be a calculation of  statistics
but also graphics and  visualisation production
application or web development
and so much more
This means that R can be used  across the workflow
without having to manually  intervene or move from one  service to another
We'll look at a workflow a bit  later
Comparing to SPSS though
that's a domain-specific tool
This means that there's a  specific domain of functionality
In SPSS, this is relevant to  statistics but there's
a limitation on connecting to  data sources
and what's possible with output
We'll take open-source next
R is a freely available  programming language
that has a large community of  developers that
contribute to its upkeep and new development
Additionally, through normal use of a functional programming  language
functions are created
this is reusable chunks of code  used to achieve a specific task
In the case of R
these functions can be packaged  to provide topic focussed  functions
This is, again, similar to  Python
SPSS, however, is an example of  a proprietary technology that is owned
and licensed for use by a single company, IBM
While there's a variety of  methods to achieve a goal in R
SPSS typically has a much more  restricted set of options
Finally, there's data science
Due to the way R was designed
It's been optimised for  statistical analysis and data  visualisation
This is so much more efficient  and faster than tools like SPSS
With the ability to use  different processing techniques
R can work with Big Data-sets
in a fraction of the time too
Additionally, as this has grown  a larger community
more people have been able to  contribute to developing new  packages
offering even more specialist  functionality
Here are a few of the areas that R can be used
and are used already in Public  Health Scotland (PHS)
These can even cross over in the same project
Like building a web application  or dashboard
with data visualisations to  display statistical models
and the whole process could use the principles
of Reproducible Analytical  Pipelines (RAP)
This is all done through  writing code
the code is then executed
and this will likely include  functions
those reusable chunks which can  be written and refined by topic  experts
to reduce work and maximise  efficiency
These functions may be from some well-known packages
but can also be written by  individuals
This is what a function would  look like
taking an input, performing some action, and returning an output
With these functions they can be written once and
run again and again
The use of functions reduces the amount of code
makes it easier to maintain and  update
and those with expert knowledge  can produce functions
that are then shareable across  projects
to improve efficiency and  accuracy for everyone
Here are some well-known  packages that you may have heard of
We also have the phsverse for a  few packages that were developed
internally for use across our  projects
Who knows, maybe your project  could use a package of functions too
Let's look at an example of  workflow, all using R
We start by sourcing data which  can be from databases, open  data, flat files, web scraping
and so much more
Then, we clean and process in  some way
This can include everything from data validation, calculations,  regression models,
and other analysis.
Then, it's about communicating  that work in some way
this could be a report,  dashboard, application,
including visualisations or maps or whatever it takes to reach  your audience
Up until now, we've looked at  the general features and  benefits of R
Now, let's see how that's  integrated within Public Health  Scotland (PHS)
So far, we've been talking about R
this is the programming  language
RStudio is another term you've  likely heard of
That's the software we use to  write and run R code
RStudio gives us additional  tools and features
to simplify our coding  experience
This includes connections to  publishing platforms, like  RStudio Connect
RStudio runs in a couple of  different places
One of these is on your computer
and another that runs on a  central server
We have a server version  available for staff in Public  Health Scotland
Let's have a look at how this  works
Here we have an RStudio server
this provides centralised access to the RStudio software
with significantly more power  and memory
than what is available on a  user's computer
Public Health Scotland also  maintain many databases
and other data storage  functionality
which is all secure behind a  firewall
This is a security device to  protect again unwanted access or interference
As users, we sit at the other  side of that firewall
and in order to access, we use a VPN
The VPN provides a secure tunnel for us through the firewall
connected to the services
The connection to the RStudio  server gives us a view of the  interface
but data is never transmitted
keeping the load over the VPN  minimal and preventing  unnecessary processing
This is helped further as the  data sources can also be linked
directly with the RStudio server
meaning data is directly  transferrable and we operate  this
through using the RStudio server interface
As users we also have access to  RStudio on our desktop
However, by using this, any data or call to services on the other side of the firewall
has to go through the VPN
So, you're limited to your  devices power and memory but
also adding strain to the shared resource of the VPN
So, some best practice...
Use the RStudio Server
but if we're using databases,  make efficient use of SQL
to perform initial filtering and processing of data on the  database system
such as extracting only  variables and records required
or joining multiple tables
This minimises strain on the  RStudio server
So, now you know all about R
We have a few channels of  support available
The PHS Data Science Knowledge  Base
is where all our training,  guidance, and best practice  lives
We have a training pathway  available for R
so you can pick up a topic  course relevant to you
An R User Group is available on  Teams for
being notified of news and  announcements relating to R
or asking technical queries
Finally, the Data Science team  are available
for wider support concerns and  can signpost where other  resources are
to best help you or your  projects
Thanks for watching!